Good afternoon.
Before I start,
I recognize a few faces in the audience.
Can I see how many people have already
done any WebObjects development before?
Would you forgive me
for asking the question,
why are you here?
This is an introductory session on
learning to develop using WebObjects.
If you've already done a few weeks'
worth of WebObjects development,
this is probably not the session for you.
If anybody wants to take the opportunity
to find something more advanced to go to,
please do so now.
Okay.
What will we cover?
This is going to be,
for those of you who've been on
any WebObjects programming classes,
about the equivalent of the
first week's worth of WebObjects
programming class in about 55 minutes.
I wonder, though, if I might just ask if
the clock has started yet,
just so I can count down.
So, it's going to be necessarily
a very rapid run-through.
We're not going to be able to go into
any great deal of depth on the subject.
We're going to cover a little
bit about what WebObjects is,
how you use it,
some of the basic design principles that
you use with WebObjects as a technology,
some of the main features,
and some of the benefits that
you get from using WebObjects.
In particular, as we go through,
we're going to highlight some of the
more useful aspects of the technology.
In some respects,
WebObjects is already doing,
and has been doing for some time,
what a number of other technologies are
aiming to do in separating the business
logic from the presentation layer.
What I want to do is
illustrate some of that with
demonstrations as we go through.
As I go through this presentation,
there are a few things
I'm expecting of you.
The sorts of technologies that WebObjects
developers need to know about in order to
be successful with this technology are,
first of all, Java.
It's possible to learn Java as
you're developing and gaining
experience with WebObjects.
Who here just out of interest has
not done any Java development before?
A few of you.
If you have a look on Apple's website,
you'll find a document,
Java for WebObjects developers.
Many people have found that that's a very
useful document for learning just enough
Java to figure out how to use WebObjects.
It's actually quite a good introductory
document just for learning Java itself.
It's also useful to know
something about databases.
So why are databases useful?
How do you interact with them?
And so on.
And, of course, because it's a web-based
development environment,
it's useful to know
something about HTML as well.
As important as any of
these other technologies,
though, to be successful with WebObjects,
you need an ability to
think in terms of objects.
This is a theme that I'm going
to repeat again on a couple
of occasions throughout.
For those of you who have come
from a procedural background,
for those of you who are
used to scripting and so on,
this may mark a fairly major
paradigm shift for you,
a different way of thinking
you'll find quite foreign.
The common theme throughout
is objects for the web.
What does WebObjects provide for you?
WebObjects aims to give you
a high degree of abstraction.
So we've got object representations
of a number of the different state
management entities and so on that you'll
use during typical web development.
We therefore get all the benefits
that you traditionally associated
with object-oriented design,
so reuse, simplicity of concept,
and so on.
I want to emphasize that last point,
simplicity of concept.
One of the, I'd like to suggest,
myths that's commonly associated
with WebObjects is that it
has a steep learning curve.
Kudos to Steve Heyman, then,
for pointing out that the benefit
of a steep learning curve is it
means that you learn an awful
lot in a short space of time.
What I would also like to suggest,
though, is that many people find that
WebObjects has a steep learning curve
because they do not bring to the table
The knowledge that I listed
earlier is a set of prerequisites.
People who typically have
difficulties with WebObjects
are people who don't know Java,
don't know anything about databases,
and don't know anything about HTML.
If you bring a knowledge of all
those technologies to the table
and think in terms of objects,
you'll have a much easier time.
So bear that in mind as you
approach the technology.
Another thing to bear in mind is that
having done a lot of training courses
using this technology in the past,
I've often noticed that people
have a tendency to make things
difficult for themselves.
If at any stage you find yourself
struggling with a technology,
if you can't figure out how
to get things connected,
if you can't figure out
how to do something,
stop for a moment.
Pause.
Sit back.
Think back to this session.
So take a moment,
just have a look around the
room and familiarize yourself
with this environment.
Think back to here, and think back to my
voice on stage saying,
"It's probably easier
than you're making it.
You're thinking that it's more
complicated than it really is."
Often to do something
complicated in WebObjects takes
a couple of lines of code.
The difficulty, of course,
is figuring out what
those couple of lines are.
Let's have a quick recap then
on what WebObjects is all about,
and in particular,
for those of you who might have been
to one of the previous sessions or read
a bit about the technology and so on,
what is WebObjects from a
developer's perspective?
So as you sit here,
what use will you make of the technology?
From the perspective that
we're looking at it from today,
we're looking at WebObjects as
a web development environment.
So it's a set of tools
and a set of libraries for
doing web-based development.
As you're probably aware,
WebObjects is actually useful
for creating other sorts
of application as well.
So web services, for example,
you can use it to create
desktop-based applications and so on.
But we're concentrating on its initial
strength here of building interactive,
dynamic websites.
The main strength and the main reason
that many people are interested in the
technology is because it's particularly
good at talking to databases.
So if you need to create a dynamic
website that talks to an Oracle database,
a database or whatever,
WebObjects gives you an excellent
set of technologies for doing that.
It's also especially scalable.
So if you bear in mind that, for example,
the iTunes Music Store uses
WebObjects as a backend technology,
that gives you an idea of how robust,
how scalable,
and so on this technology is.
It's been around for a long time,
so its heritage goes back a decade or so.
In terms of where WebObjects sits,
in many respects,
it can be considered as being middleware.
If we look to this report card,
one of its main goals is
to play well with others.
So it doesn't matter
what web server you use,
it doesn't matter what database you use,
it doesn't matter what HTML you
want to produce and so on,
WebObjects fits in with the
way that you want to work.
One of the advantages of this,
one of the particular benefits of this,
and the way the technology
itself is structured,
is that it allows you to concentrate
on the part of the application
that you're most interested in.
As a developer, you're probably most
interested in the Java,
the application logic.
It allows your database
admins to concentrate on
the database side of things,
and your graphic designers
to concentrate on the HTML.
Again, from the developer's perspective,
what tools do you use on a daily basis?
The main one that you're going to use,
certainly on Mac OS X,
so there are other options for
some of these on other platforms.
On Mac OS X, you'll use Xcode,
so the traditional
Mac OS X development environment.
Can I just see,
has anybody not used Xcode before?
Okay, so a couple of you.
But for the rest of you,
familiar territory.
WebObjects Builder provides you
with a graphical HTML editing tool.
You can use others,
but WebObjects Builder,
we'll see in a moment,
obviously has particular strengths
for dealing with some of the dynamic
elements that WebObjects uses.
EO Modeler, finally,
is our entity relational mapping tool.
So it's going to be the key to
figuring out how stuff in the database
gets into our application on screen.
Some of the other things that WebObjects
gives us as an entire package,
it gives us a collection of frameworks
for providing object abstractions for
most of the entities or things that we
want to deal with as web developers,
in particular for representing
dynamic web elements,
that's individual strings, hyperlinks,
web pages, and so on,
and for doing state management.
One of the frameworks that I'll
just mention in passing here
is the Foundation Framework.
Who's done any Cocoa development or heard
of the Foundation Framework in Cocoa?
For those of you, again, small number,
there's a fairly strong
correspondence between the
foundation framework in Cocoa and the
foundation framework in WebObjects.
It provides you with a set of utility
classes for representing numbers,
dates, dictionaries, arrays, and so on.
In addition,
there are a couple of other frameworks.
The WebObjects framework itself
provides the object abstractions
for the dynamic elements,
and then there's a couple of frameworks
that are bundled together in something
called the Enterprise Object Framework,
which actually interacts
with a database for you.
So that's WebObjects in a nutshell
from the developer's perspective.
In the remaining sections,
what I want to look at are, first of all,
some of the underlying design
patterns that are going to be useful
to you as WebObjects developers.
So some of the main ideas
that underlie the technology.
Then have a look in greater
detail at some of the
frameworks that you'll be using.
So what's in the WebObjects framework,
what's in the
Enterprise Objects framework.
And see then, particularly illustrated
using demonstrations,
some of the tasks that you'll
face on a day-to-day basis.
So, turning first of all to the concepts,
to reiterate a point that I made on
several occasions up until now then.
Objects, objects, objects.
Think in terms of objects.
Many of the tools that you may
have used in the past will require
you to think in procedural terms,
require you to do a lot of data
munging or whatever to figure out
what's going on in your application.
WebObjects is, as the name implies,
object-oriented.
So, we have object abstractions for
web page and things on a web page
that you can send messages to.
We have object abstractions
for records in the database.
So, when you retrieve information
from the database,
you get objects representing the records.
Even the HTTP request and response
are abstracted out into objects.
So, for those of you who may in some
environments be used to doing
your own parsing or messing around
with HTTP request and response,
don't have to do that.
We'll see an illustration
of that very early on.
And then, of course,
for state management.
So why are we interested
in state management?
Again, thinking about WebObjects as a
traditional web development environment,
one of the things that many people
want to get out of a web environment
is some sort of state management.
If you're putting up a website,
particularly commercial
websites these days,
you want to have an idea of a user,
so that a user has a shopping
cart that they can put stuff
into and later give you a credit
card number that you can charge,
that you can earn some money.
I know that's possibly not part of the
traditional web development environment,
but there you go.
So WebObjects provides you with
state management abstractions
for an individual session,
for an individual user,
and then for an application,
and then at the level
of an individual page.
The design patterns,
the main ones that you
need to bear in mind,
first of all, Model-View-Controller.
Has anybody -- who's heard of
Model-View-Controller before?
This is going to be something if you
go to many of the other sessions,
particularly the Cocoa sessions,
for those of you who are interested,
you're going to get drummed into
during the remainder of this week.
The idea fundamentally behind
Model-View-Controller is the separation
or the factoring out of function.
As the name implies,
you have different sorts of
objects in your applications.
Model objects, which typically correspond
to records from the database.
View objects,
which in our case are going to
represent web pages or dynamic
elements within a web page.
And then a controller object,
which mediates between the two.
The idea is that you should not pollute
your model objects in particular with
any knowledge of the user interface.
This makes them particularly
reusable between applications.
Similar story then with the view objects.
If a view object is not
particularly bothered about what
sort of data it's presenting,
they're reusable.
The controller is a glue code
which sits between the two,
and typically that's unique to
each individual application.
Another important design pattern,
key value coding.
Probably again familiar to some
of you from the Cocoa environment,
the idea behind key value coding
is that it gives you a means of
accessing an object's properties using
the name of a property as a string.
So if a person has a first name property,
rather than using an accessor
method or accessing an instance
variable of that object directly,
you can use a message such as
value for key and then pass in a
parameter first name as a string.
The main advantage of this
is that this gives you very
good flexibility at runtime.
You can determine at runtime
what property of an object
is that you want to access.
This is what gives WebObjects
an awful lot of its flexibility.
Another point to bear in mind
here is that in addition to
asking for just a single property,
you can follow what
are known as key paths.
So if a person has a
relationship to their manager,
and the manager then is another
person who has a first name,
you can ask a person object for
their manager's first name by using
the key path manager.firstname.
So key value coding gives you a
means of traversing relationships.
The final design pattern that I want
to draw your attention to here is one
that's perhaps a little bit unexpected:
target action.
Again, anybody from the Cocoa development
environment or from any other
development environment who's
heard of target action before?
A very simple idea, basically, that when,
and certainly in a desktop application,
if you click a button,
a message is sent to whatever
object you've connected it to.
What we'll see, I think,
straight up very,
very early on is that with WebObjects,
you get a development environment
that's very much like,
in many respects, a desktop application
development environment.
When you click on a
button or a hyperlink,
you can cause an action message
to be sent to an object.
To return to frameworks,
for those of you who haven't come
across the jargon word framework before,
you can think of a framework as being
pretty much like a class library,
a collection of objects.
The main differences are, A,
a framework may contain other resources.
So it may contain HTML,
it may contain documentation,
it may contain EO model files.
We'll talk about those later.
In addition,
one of the main things that may
affect you as developers here is
that programming using frameworks
is philosophically rather different
to some of the programming
that you may have been used to.
If you're used to procedural
programming or scripting or whatever,
typically you're used to being in charge.
at the top of your program,
you'll deal with getting
information from the HTTP request.
You'll do something with it,
and at the end, emit HTML, perhaps.
[Transcript missing]
People don't,
or developers don't feel that they're
in control of their application.
If you find yourself in that situation,
again, sit back, don't worry, relax.
The reality is you're not in control.
But that's a good thing.
What, again,
I hope we'll see very swiftly is
that letting WebObjects take care
of the heavy lifting frees you
from a lot of that responsibility
and allows you to concentrate
on the more interesting things.
Which would you rather deal with,
HTTP requests and responses or
the actual application logic?
I suggest that dealing with the
application logic is going to
certainly be a more productive
way of using your time.
So, turning first of all to
the WebObjects framework,
and we're just going to discuss
it a very little bit before
going into a couple of demos.
Remember that the WebObjects framework
is the framework that contains the
object abstractions for the dynamic
elements you'll have on a page,
a page itself, and provides the state
management classes.
The base method, the root, I'm sorry,
the base class for web pages and indeed
for parts of web pages is Woe Component.
As you create web pages or new web pages,
you're going to be creating
new instances or new classes
subclassed from Woe Component.
Let's illustrate that.
with the first demo.
So, quick reminder here.
I'm not expecting here for
everybody to go away being an
expert WebObjects developer.
What I want you to get out
of this is a feeling for what
WebObjects development is about,
what some of the typical processes are,
and so on, so that subsequently,
if you want to take a look at
the product and start using it,
you can feel comfortable having seen
somebody else do this and seen that
it's not particularly difficult.
In Project Builder,
I'm going to start off by creating a
new WebObjects application that I'm
going to inspiringly name WebObjects.
Hello, Woe World.
I'm not going to type it correctly.
And because this is a demo,
let's just ignore all these parts for
the moment and go and look at the...
So, just out of the box,
Xcode gives us a project
that contains a lot of stuff.
Let's just start off by building and
running that to see what happens.
Well, it goes away, builds, runs,
and for your convenience,
it starts up and displays the web page.
At the moment, there's nothing in it.
That's probably unsurprising.
We haven't done anything.
What do we have to do to
actually configure this and
get something to display?
The page that we're seeing
first of all is the main page.
Out of the box,
the project template provides
us with a main component,
which comprises a number
of different files,
including this main.woe thing.
Which is the template for the first page.
If I open that in WebObjects Builder,
straightaway I hope you can
see that WebObjects Builder is
a graphical HTML editing tool.
[Transcript missing]
Since that's the first
page that's displayed,
in the fullness of time,
I get the text that I wanted.
That's not particularly exciting.
I said that WebObjects was a dynamic
[Transcript missing]
I can replace Woe
World with a Woe String.
[Transcript missing]
Let's see what happens
when I click Add here.
If I go to my Java code,
We'll see that I've got
a class called Main,
which is the object that underlies
this page when it's generated,
that currently just has
a constructor method.
When I say Add,
let's add some accessor methods as well,
you'll see I get an instance variable
added and suitable accessor methods.
In WebObjects Builder,
I also get username added here.
[Transcript missing]
The value for this string to be whatever
username happens to be at runtime.
In my constructor, let's say then I...
Set that to be something
not particularly dynamic.
Oops.
And build and run the application.
I'm going to pass on for the moment
figuring out how we can actually
get the user's name directly.
It's going to come in the next session.
So let's for now see how can
we get something a little
bit more dynamic than that.
Let's suppose we want to
display the current time.
Again,
we're going to use a woe string and
add another key for current time.
In this case, though,
This is one thing to just pause
and think about for a moment.
In this case, I'm only going to define
an accessor method.
This is, in effect, a read-only value.
I don't need to have an
instance variable for this.
I just need a means of
generating this value.
So I'm only going to have a get method,
current time,
which is going to return an NS timestamp.
And I can connect that up.
And without going into
too much detail here,
associate a date format with that.
So that specifies how the time is
going to be represented on the page.
In my current time method then,
rather than returning
an instance variable,
I'm going to return a new
NS Timestamp.
So when a new NS Timestamp
is created with no additional
Constructor arguments,
it'll be set to the
current date and time.
So if I build that,
[Transcript missing]
In particular,
a couple of things to notice there.
We're sitting back being the
passive recipient of messages.
This illustrates the framework aspect.
We're not actually doing
anything very active.
In particular,
has anybody spotted where the
HTTP request and HTTP response?
[Transcript missing]
Rather than just displaying
hello on the first page,
I want to display a hyperlink,
a hyperlink that's going
to take us to a new page.
Hyperlink, you might guess straight off,
is represented by an instance
or a dynamic element,
Woe hyperlink.
If I select in this toolbar,
I surround the text that I've
selected with a hyperlink by
clicking on the Woe hyperlink button.
A hyperlink is associated with an action.
So, to my web page,
I'm going to add an action
this time rather than a key.
The action method is going
to be called GoToWelcome,
and it's going to take
us to the Welcome page.
This is important because I'm
getting a step ahead of myself here,
deliberately.
I want you to watch what
happens when I add this.
Here, go to welcome gets added
to the list of variables.
Because WebObjects Builder doesn't
know any better at this stage.
I'm going to specify that the
action associated with the hyperlink
is go to welcome and save that.
And now I'm going to add
the welcome component.
[Transcript missing]
And a means of setting it,
because I'm going to say,
"Welcome username."
If you watched or if you're watching
very carefully when I saved that,
go to Welcome.
[Transcript missing]
A WebObjects component page and takes no
methods is counted as an action method.
Notice in the action method
that was added to the Java file,
I get a helpful little hint here,
initialize your component.
If there's an initialization
that I want to do,
I can do that after I've created the
instance of the page I'm about to go to.
[Transcript missing]
So again,
we get our sort of dynamic content,
click me,
and I get taken to the next page
with some new information on it.
So that was a very quick run-through.
Let's have a quick recap
of what it was that we saw.
First of all, actually,
let's just illustrate
one other point here.
I sort of mentioned that
A component comprises a
number of different files.
There are three files that
we're primarily interested
in in a WebObjects page.
First of all, the HTML that defines the
template for the page.
The Java file is the underlying
business logic for that page.
And then there's a WAD file.
The WAD file is what defines the
mapping between what's in the dynamic
elements and what's in the code.
The main component is created
by WebObjects automatically.
points to make about the HTML file.
Firstly, remember that WebObjects tries
to play well with others.
Just because you're using WebObjects
does not mean that you can't use
other web-based technologies as well.
So if you want to use CSS,
if you want to use
JavaScript or whatever,
you can use those technologies in
a WebObjects-based application.
The only thing that's different
about a WebObjects page is that it
includes a set of WebObjects tags
to represent the dynamic elements.
The dynamic elements
that we've seen so far,
WoW String and WoW Hyperlink,
later on we'll see WoW Image.
He's got a collection of attributes,
each of which you can set
graphically using WebObjects Builder.
The Java file then is the business logic.
You can put whatever instance
variables you want into the page.
You can put whatever methods you
want into the page and so on.
The only difference about some
of the methods is that some
methods may be action methods.
Action methods have no arguments
and return an instance of a
subclass of WoE component.
These are what you use for navigation.
The WAD file then is just a simple
text file that binds the two together,
that specifies what attribute of the
Java page is used for what attribute,
such as the value, for example,
of a string.
To go into some new areas then,
let's have a look at state management.
Typically, when you deal with a
web-based application,
you're interested in managing users.
When a person comes to your website,
you want to keep track of them so you
can find out what products they're
interested in buying and so on.
Sometimes you need to maintain
application-wide state.
WebObjects provides you with
abstractions of both of these,
as you might expect from the names here.
A session represents the current user,
which you can access from a page
using a static method session,
which simply returns the current session,
whoever it happens to be.
You don't have to do any work in
figuring out who the current user is.
Similar sort of thing with
the application object.
If you want to add states
to the application object,
you can access the application object
from any page using the application
static method of the application class.
If you're dealing with dynamic content,
you typically need some means of
retrieving information from the user.
So, as you might expect from
a web-based application,
we have abstractions for a form on a
web page and text fields and so on,
and also be able to retrieve
information from the user.
We also have a Submit button,
so a Woe Submit button that
you can use to allow the user
to submit their information.
And again,
let's straighten that in a demonstration.
So going back to our
previous application,
rather than just click me,
I want to add a form.
[Transcript missing]
This time, however,
I'm not going to collect that
information on the current page.
Username is probably something I want to
collect at the level of the application.
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to show you how to
build a WebObjects application
using the WebObjects application.
I can rather happily remove code.
I don't now need
[Transcript missing]
From the second page that I'm going to,
I'm going to get it
directly from the session.
Again, build and run.
Thank you very much.
I hope that today or tomorrow you
will get a collection of all of these
examples on the downloadable disk image.
If you haven't been following just now,
you will have the examples
to have a look at later.
Plus, there is a wealth of documentation
already available online.
So, where do we go from here?
If we have a look at a little
bit more about some of the other
dynamic elements that we can use,
there's a whole range of
different dynamic elements that
WebObjects provides you with.
In addition just to strings, hyperlinks,
and so on, in particular,
a repetition to allow you to iterate
over the contents of an array,
conditional to allow you
to specify whether or not,
depending on what the
current circumstances are,
a particular part of a
web page gets displayed.
We have support for checkboxes,
radio buttons, and so on.
In particular, then,
we have support for partial components.
The main page that we've
been creating so far,
or the welcome page,
could actually be subparts of a
page that we can reuse in different
applications or on different pages.
One of the more exciting ones in some
respects is the Woe component content,
which I urge you to have
a look at at some stage,
which can represent the
template for a page.
We can actually have dynamic
templates for our pages as well.
The only one I want to have a look
at just for now is the Woe repetition
to illustrate how that can be used to
iterate over the contents of an array in,
again, another demo, this time starting
With an existing project.
So in this project,
I've already defined a session
class that creates for me
an array of person objects.
In my first page,
I want to display their list of
all of the people in that array,
and I'll do that by
adding a woe repetition,
which will iterate over all
of the people in that array to
be able to iterate over those
I need a variable which will be
set to each of those in turn,
and that's going to be a
variable of type person.
You don't need accessor methods.
So for each person in turn,
I want to display their full name.
If I build and run that application then,
[Transcript missing]
I can surround the person's name,
or each person's name,
with a hyperlink to -- let me
just remind myself -- select
A person.
So the action method that will be
invoked when the user clicks on
the hyperlink is select person.
What that will do is go to the next page,
which is going to be selection,
and pass current person
as a selected person.
The selection page,
you can probably imagine,
is going to display the
WebObjects application
The name of the selected person.
So, I'm passing information
from one page to the next.
So dealing with iterations or repetitions
within WebObjects turns out to be very
simple if you think in terms of objects.
Final thing, just to add here,
to add a little bit of substance to it,
let's add
The ability to display a graphic.
Another accessor method,
That's a read-only value that
simply returns the person's
name with the suffix .jpeg.
Which I can then bind to the
file name of a WoW image.
In the resources for my project,
I've got a series of images.
So when I select an individual,
I can see their picture.
And so on.
So I hope you're getting the feeling
from this already that it's a
fairly easy development environment,
in particular very interactive.
So there's not a big turnaround time.
You can very quickly see the results
of what it is that you're doing.
The final thing that I want to come
onto is what many people regard as
the crown jewels of this technology,
the database access layer.
Database access, as I mentioned,
is mediated through the
Enterprise Objects Framework.
EOF, as perhaps sometimes
confusingly it's referred to,
is the collection of objects that
mediate between what's in the database
and the objects in your application.
Loosely speaking,
you can say that a record or a row in
your database is going to correspond
to an object in your application.
In your database, you have tables and
either records or rows,
depending on your terminology.
In your application, you have classes and
instances of classes.
EOF is what maps the two things together.
Typically, you're dealing at a high
level of abstraction.
One thing I want to reemphasize here,
and something that applies
throughout WebObjects,
is that even though you're using
typically a high level of abstraction,
you are not precluded
[Transcript missing]
Even though you're using WebObjects,
you can still use raw SQL if you want.
You can still use JDBC.
You can still get the HTTP header
information and so on if you want to,
if you feel that you need to.
The other vital thing about
EOF is that it provides a great
degree of management for you.
I said, loosely speaking,
an object in your application
corresponds to a record in the database,
or vice versa,
because if I simply say that a
record in the database corresponds
to an object in your application,
there's a temptation to think from
that that your entire database
is going to end up in memory.
That is not the case.
One of the things that
EOF is particularly good at,
for those of you,
did anybody go to the core
data presentation just now?
When Andrea spoke just
now about faulting,
the same technology applies to EOF.
You only retrieve into memory using
EOF those records that you actually need.
If you are collecting a
selection of persons from a
person table in your database,
you only get enterprise objects created
for those persons that you retrieve.
If a person has a
relationship to a department,
Until such time as you ask a person for
the department to which they belong,
the department record is not
fetched from the database.
So, EOF puts bounds for you on the
object graph that you create.
In particular, it's
We'll see illustrated in
a couple of slides time.
EOF also manages relationships
between objects for you.
How many people do database access?
Who uses SQL here?
Okay, so you're probably familiar with
the concepts of primary key,
foreign key, and so on.
We'll see that the way that
relationships are represented in
objects is very different to the way
they're represented in a database,
and EOF needs to do
some extra work for you.
How does it do its work?
Well, again, for those of you who
were at Andreas' session,
it relies ultimately on a model.
One of the key parts of developing
your application is that at the outset,
you should create an ER model
that defines the mapping between
what's in your application
and what's in the database.
You can also create custom classes
to represent your data objects.
You don't have to if you don't want to.
EOF provides for you an
EO Generic Record class,
which is able to represent
any sort of entity.
Typically, however,
in order to add value,
you'll do some customization.
It also then provides you with a whole
infrastructure for actually accessing
the database for making changes to
objects and then saving those changes
back to the database should you wish.
Ultimately, as I mentioned, though,
everything is basically
founded upon the EO model.
The EO model, you edit graphically
using the EO modeler tool,
which I'm not going to demonstrate now,
I'm afraid.
The picture should show you
that basically it's an entity
relationship modeling tool.
With it, you can specify what class in
your application is going to be
used to represent what table in
your database and what columns.
[Transcript missing]
In your application,
your database rows or records
are represented by instances
of enterprise objects.
We have EOGenericRecord,
and I mentioned on an earlier slide,
EO Custom Object.
EOGenericRecord is rather
like a data dictionary.
It's capable of representing
any sort of entity.
As a historical footnote,
it happens to inherit
from EO Custom Object.
In your applications,
you'll typically just subclass eogeneric
records should you wish to do so.
In a subclass,
you can add whatever custom logic,
whatever behavior you want.
Again, for those of you who
are at Andreas' session,
this corresponds to
NSManagedObject in Core Data.
Some of the behavior that you might
want to add may be very straightforward.
If we have a person class,
it may be that you simply want
to have a consistent means of
representing a person's full name.
So a bit of custom logic would simply
be to implement a full name method,
which returns a concatenation
of first name and last name.
If you want to edit enterprise objects,
Thinking back to what I said about
WebObjects as a technology as a whole,
you're just dealing with objects.
What do you do when you want to
edit any other object in Java?
Simply send a message.
If you remember also what
I said about key-value coding,
You can edit a given enterprise object
by simply using key value coding methods,
such as takeValueForKey.
So you pass in as arguments
the take value for key method,
the new value,
and the name of the attribute that
you want to change as a string.
Or, if you've implemented your own custom
subclasses of Enge Generic Record,
which have custom
accessor methods defined,
you simply call a
relevant accessor method.
An important point here is that a
similar sort of thing works when you're
manipulating relationships as when you're
manipulating straightforward attributes.
WebObjects even handles
many-to-many relationships for you.
So for the DBAs amongst you who had
to deal with join tables up until now,
you do not have to deal
with join tables using EOF.
It's all handled for you,
provided you've specified
the model correctly.
So, if you're using,
if you have a relationship, say,
between a movie entity
and a studio entity,
and you want to set the movie, sorry,
it's the studio to which a movie belongs,
if you had a custom subclass
of the original record,
you might simply send a set
studio message to a given
instance of a movie class.
There's a little bit extra work
that you might have to do if
you have too many relationships.
for Too Many Relationship to set
the movies for a given studio,
you might have custom methods,
add to and then name of relationship,
and remove from name of relationship.
One of the issues here, though,
relates back to the issue that
I mentioned about the way that
relationships are represented in
objects versus the way that they're
represented in your database.
If you remember in a database,
a relationship is modeled by
having a foreign key in a table.
In the object world,
things are a little bit different.
With objects, we have references,
whether it be directly to an instance
of the destination of the relationship,
or a reference to an array that
contains a collection of instances of
the destination of the relationship.
Therefore, if we want to assign,
in this example,
an employee to a different department,
Our employee, Jackson,
happens currently to belong
to the Events department.
If we simply tell Jackson that
you're now in sales,
if you think about this in
terms of the real world,
if all that we do is tell Jackson,
his current department doesn't
know that he's been reassigned.
Moreover,
the new department that he's going to
doesn't know that he's being reassigned.
We have to explicitly tell each of
the two departments about the move.
It's a similar thing in objects.
On the database,
all that we would do is change
the foreign key in a table.
In objects, we have to be more explicit
and actually send messages to.
The other two departments.
If I go back,
one of the things that I skipped over at
the end of this slide was that there's
actually a rather long method name,
AddObjectToBothSidesRelationshipWithKey,
which at first is rather intimidating.
When you start using WebObjects,
you'll learn to like it because
what it does is it manages
all of this stuff for you.
So for those of you who are DBAs or
have dealt with databases in the past,
this is a fairly high
degree of abstraction.
You don't have to worry
about primary keys.
about foreign keys.
You don't have to worry about maintenance
of integrity of relationships.
EOF manages all of that for you.
A lot of that's managed for
you by the editing context.
The editing context can be thought of
basically as a sort of scratch pad.
It's the object that mediates
between you and the underlying
connection to the database.
So it's the object that you turn to when
you want to fetch stuff from the database
and save stuff back to the database.
It also observes all of the objects
that you've retrieved from the database,
looks for changes to them,
and then in particular allows you to
undo those changes should you wish.
You can get hold of it, sorry,
each session, as you might expect,
so every user wants to have
their own collection of products
that they're buying and their
own shopping cart and so on,
each session comes along with its
own default editing context that
you typically turn to when you
want to do something like fetch
information from the database.
So to fetch information
from the database,
you have to specify what
it is that you're after.
You specify it using an object, again,
known as a fetch specification.
Sending a message,
objects with face specification,
to the editing context
returns to you a message
[Transcript missing]
An editing context to ask
the database through the
intervening objects in EOF for,
for example, all of the movies whose
title contains the word Nemo.
We might also add that we want to have
the objects returned sorted by title.
So we simply send a message,
object specification, pass the parameter,
the specification that we
specified to the editing context,
it returns then a collection of objects.
The fetch specification itself
contains all the information that
EOF requires to determine what's
going to be got from the database.
Minimally,
we must specify the name of the entity,
so what table is it in effect
that we're interested in.
We might also want to narrow our search.
So maybe we say, as in this case,
we're only interested in movies
whose title contains the word Nemo.
[Transcript missing]
This bit of code is a little bit dense,
so apologies for that,
but this bit of code basically
does all of that for us.
So first of all, get hold of an editing
context in the first line,
create a new qualifier,
Create a new set of sort orderings.
It only contains a single
sort ordering here.
And then create our new fetch
specification object and send
that to our editing context.
So, didn't give you very long
to have a look at that,
but I've got a prepackaged
demo that does that.
You'll notice that I've already
got an ER model in my application.
I've already set up a repetition
that's going to iterate
over a collection of movies,
one at a time,
and display the name of the studio
in this case that I'm interested
in for no particular reason.
If I have a look at the code,
the code is basically the same as,
in essence,
[Transcript missing]
Create a qualifier,
create a set of sort orderings,
a fetch specification,
and then use that fetch specification.
This is an introductory to
intermediate-level session.
You will see demonstrations
of the WebObjects tools,
design and flow of a typical
WebObjects application,
and a review of deployment scenarios
that allow you to understand how to
best take advantage of this technology.
Is this going to be more kind?
Thank you.
That's more interesting still.
Now, I'm going to guess that this
has something to do with some
of the other setup that was
done after I set my stuff up.
What's happening is that for some reason
I can't actually connect to the database.
I suspect that it has something
to do with the IP setup
that was done afterwards.
Such is life.
And I don't think that there's anything
that I can quickly do to rectify that,
which is, shall we say, unfortunate.
I'm guessing from the lack of
responses there that that's the answer,
so I hope you will forgive me.
That's going to be...
Even less impressive a demo
than we might have expected.
If you could imagine that rather
than a collection of error messages,
This web page displayed a list of
all of the movies that we'd fetched.
I hope you might agree
that had it worked,
This is actually not very many
lines of code to go to a database,
fetch some information,
and collect a series of
records back from the database.
The subtle point that
I wanted to make here,
that I said I was just
glossing over a little bit,
was notice that in our qualifier,
we'd specified that we're interested
in the studio name for the movies.
So rather than just searching by title,
- Which is searching within the single
table that we were interested in,
we're actually traversing
a relationship here.
So we're traversing the
relationship from a movie to
[Transcript missing]
We're traversing relationships
in this query as well.
Not particularly difficult.
So for those of you who've
used other environments,
particularly anybody here use DJB?
Anybody care to do a lines of
code comparison between what
we should have achieved here,
had the database connection been up,
and what you would have had to do in EJB?
Fewer lines of code here?
Honestly, there's somebody nodding
in the front row.
So with that,
I said it was going to be a very,
very quick run-through.
The goal here was just to give you
some sort of a taste of what it's
like to do WebObjects development.
And as you can see,
there's occasional frustrations with it.
But I hope that you might also see that,
compared with some environments
that you're used to,
it's actually quite fluid,
very responsive, and in particular,
there's not many lines of
code to actually achieve
quite an interesting result.
The example that I've been through,
I will get up on the
connect.apple.com site as quickly
as possible after this session.
It may be tomorrow
evening that it goes up.
In the interim, though, there's plenty of
documentation available online.
So WebObjects is very
thoroughly documented.
Basically, the main place that I would
suggest that you start with is the
aptly named Getting Started page.